Jep 4.3 Release Notes
*********************
The maven groupId for Jep has changed from black.ninia to org.ninia. This
release drops support for versions of Python older than 3.10. It includes
changes to modernize and simplify the build, improve compatibility with
isolated sub-interpreters, and remove use of deprecated Python features.

Updates to PyConfig
*******************
`PyConfig <https://ninia.github.io/jep/javadoc/4.3/jep/PyConfig.html>`_ has
been updated so that the API maps directly to the PyConfig structure in the
Python C API which was introduced with
`PEP 587 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0587/>`_. Most of the existing methods
are now deprecated. The deprecated methods will continue to work as they did
before for now but they will be removed in a future release.

Share Interpreter State between Threads
***************************************
It is now possible to attach multiple threads to an existing Interpreter using
`Interpreter.attach() <https://ninia.github.io/jep/javadoc/4.3/jep/Interpreter.html#attach-boolean->`_.
Interpreters created this way will share state such as ``sys.modules`` and
even have the option to share globals which allows multiple threads to have
identical access to an interpreter.

Modernized build
****************
Project configuration is now in pyproject.toml. The actual build is still
done with the legacy setuptools. For compatibility with the isolated build
environment used by pip, numpy is now a required build dependency. When jep is
built with numpy it can be used without numpy as long as NDArrays are not
passed from Java to Python. It is still possible to build jep without numpy
if neccesary but it now requires downloading the source and modifying
pyproject.toml to remove the numpy dependency.
